Add a section for http prioritization in transport retransmission (#1504)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-priority.md

a PUSH_PROMISE or HEADERS frame.

# Retransmission Scheduling

> A transport may detect packet losses and then retranmit lost information to
> provide reliability. Examples include TCP and QUIC. While this document
> specifies HTTP layer prioritization, its effectiveness can be further achieved
> if transport layer also respect such priorities. Besides scheduling new data,
> transport implementations MAY also consider stream priorities during
> retransmission. In this section we will use QUIC as an example to discusss a
> couple scenarios an implementation need to consider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transport protocols such as TCP and QUIC provide reliability by detecting packet
losses and retransmitting lost information. While this document specifies
HTTP-layer prioritization, its effectiveness can be further enhanced if the
transport layer factors priority into scheduling both new data and
retransmission data. The remainder of this section illustrates this using QUIC
as an example.
```

This text you proposed is good. This suggestion is editorial to tighten things up a little. I've also removed the MAY since levying requirements on a transport protocol seems odd for this draft. IMO it should be enough to demonstrate the advantages and let people make up their own minds on what to do.

> {{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, Section 13.3 states that endpoints SHOULD 
> prioritize retransmission over sending new data, unless otherwise specified by
> application. When an HTTP/3 application uses priority scheme defined in this 
> document, the QUIC transport layer MAY take stream priorities as input to 
> scheduling the sending of both retransmission data and new data. For example, 
> if one stream with higher urgency has new data to send and another stream with 
> lower urgency has retransmission data to send, a QUIC transport may choose to 
> schedule the higher urgency new data before the lower urgency retransmission
> data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, Section 13.3 states "Endpoints SHOULD prioritize
retransmission of data over sending new data, unless priorities specified by the
application indicate otherwise". When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
scheme defined in this document, the QUIC transport implementation SHOULD
consider the relative priority of streams when scheduling of new data and
retransmission data. For example, if one stream with higher urgency has new data
to send and another stream with lower urgency has retransmission data to send, a
QUIC transport is more likely to fulfil the application's intent if it chooses
to schedule the higher urgency new data before the lower urgency retransmission
data. While there is no requirement on QUIC implementations to implement the
extensible priority scheme, an aligned prioritization model can help
applications manage scheduling expectations.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we have enough data at this point to know if it should be a SHOULD or a MAY... AFAIK nobody has really researched the impact of this. IIUC FB implemented this, but hasn't looked too closely at metric impact yet (though I assume it's not massive in either direction or it would have been spotted). 

I'm mainly thinking about (theoretical) situations where there's just a single packet lost of a low prio stream and that's the only outstanding data for that stream, where it might make sense to retrans that packet before higher prio data etc. (you can extrapolate that to X packets, where X is a certain percentage of estimated cwnd etc.). Similar remarks can be made for potential starvation, app-layer logic that might abort streams if they take too long to complete, etc. 

I would say it's probably best to go with the conservative MAY for now, mainly to make sure people are aware of this possibility.

Reviewer: Thanks Robin. 

Since we don't have much info I agree it's hard to make any recommendation. We should be wary of suggsting something that turns out to be bad.

 To paraphrase the point I was trying to communicate, QUIC transport says "SHOULD prioritize restransmissions unless there's some communicated application-intent" and here we are saying "if the transport layer speaks a compatible model, it really SHOULD factor in stream priorities, but what chooses to do is still up to it". 

If you agree with the premise of that point, I think I can highlight it better by changing words around a bit such as

> 
            When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
            scheme defined in this document and the QUIC transport implementation
            supports application indicated stream priority, a transport that considers
            the relative priority of streams when scheduling both new data and
            retransmission data might better match the expectations of the application.
            However, here are no requirements on how it chooses to schedule based on
            this information because the decision depends on several factors and trade-offs,
            A transport could prioritize new data for a higher urgency stream over retransmission data
            for a lower priority stream, or it could prioritize retransmission data over new data 
            irrespective of urgencies.

Reviewer 2: I think this newer text indeed better reflects what we should be saying here, and also highlights the tradeoffs.

> {{?I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}, Section 6.2.4 also highlights consideration of 
> application priorities when sending probe packets after PTO timer expiration.
> An implementation using this prioritization scheme for new or retransmitted
> data, MAY choose a different strategy for prioritizing probe data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{?I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}, Section 6.2.4 also highlights consideration of
application priorities when sending probe packets after PTO timer expiration. An
QUIC implementation supporting application-indicated priorities might use the
relative priority of streams when choosing probe data. 
```

I think it is clearer to just make this a consideration point that implementers should be aware of, so removing normative language.

a PUSH_PROMISE or HEADERS frame.

# Retransmission Scheduling

> Transport protocols such as TCP and QUIC provide reliability by detecting packet

Reviewer 3: Why is this not referring to the QUIC RFCs?

Reviewer 4: Hah, thanks @reschke for promoting my H-index.

```suggestion
Transport protocols such as TCP {{?RFC0793}} and QUIC {{?RFC9000}} provide reliability by detecting packet
```

losses and retransmitting lost information. While this document specifies
HTTP-layer prioritization, its effectiveness can be further enhanced if the
transport layer factors priority into scheduling both new data and
retransmission data. The remainder of this section discusses considerations when
using QUIC.

{{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, Section 13.3 states "Endpoints SHOULD prioritize
retransmission of data over sending new data, unless priorities specified by the
application indicate otherwise". When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
scheme defined in this document and the QUIC transport implementation supports
application indicated stream priority, a transport that considers the relative
priority of streams when scheduling both new data and retransmission data might

> better match the expectations of the application. However, here are no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
better match the expectations of the application. However, there are no
```

requirements on how a transport chooses to schedule based on this information

> because the decision depends on several factors and trade-offs, It could

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
because the decision depends on several factors and trade-offs. It could
```

> application indicate otherwise". When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
> scheme defined in this document, the QUIC transport implementation SHOULD
> consider the relative priority of streams when scheduling of new data and
> retransmission data. For example, if one stream with higher urgency has new data
> to send and another stream with lower urgency has retransmission data to send, a
> QUIC transport is more likely to fulfil the application's intent if it chooses
> to schedule the higher urgency new data before the lower urgency retransmission
> data. While there is no requirement on QUIC implementations to implement the
> extensible priority scheme, an aligned prioritization model can help
> applications manage scheduling expectations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application indicate otherwise". When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
scheme defined in this document and the QUIC transport implementation supports
application indicated stream priority, a transport that considers the relative
priority of streams when scheduling both new data and retransmission data might
better match the expectations of the application. However, here are no
requirements on how a transport chooses to schedule based on this information
because the decision depends on several factors and trade-offs, It could
prioritize new data for a higher urgency stream over retransmission data for a
lower priority stream, or it could prioritize retransmission data over new data
irrespective of urgencies.
```

As per the thread with @rmarx, this suggestion removes any formal requirement., Instead, it highlights that expectation matching might be desirable but that tradeoffs might prevent that in practicce (very much the ethos of this spec).

@yangchi if your're happy with this suggestion I think the PR is good to go. But if you disagree then we can discuss further.

Author: Ye i'm OK with this change. I think now that SHOULD is removed, and a "might" is used, the part after "However, here are..." isn't necessary. But i think that's just editorial bits.

on the information that is available to them from the QUIC transport layer.
TODO: so what can we suggest?

> # Retransmission Considerations in QUIC Transport

Reviewer: I think this section would be better placed after the `Server Scheduling` section. We could then rename it to `Retransmission Scheduling`.

> {{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} states endpoints SHOULD prioritize retransmission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, Section 13.3 states that endpoints SHOULD prioritize retransmission
```

> over sending new data, unless otherwise specified by application. When priority
> scheme presented in this document is used, QUIC transport layer MAY take stream
> priorities into account when it has both retransmission data and new data to
> send. For example, if one stream with higher urgency has new data to send and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over sending new data, unless otherwise specified by application. When an HTTP/3
application uses the priority scheme defined in this document, the QUIC transport layer
MAY take stream priorities as input to scheduling the sending of both retransmission
data and new data. For example, if one stream with higher urgency has new data to send and
```

another stream with lower urgency has retransmission data to send, a QUIC
transport may choose to schedule the higher urgency new data before the lower
urgency retransmission data.

> Another consideration is prioritizing among different streams when sending
> probe packets as desribed in Section 6.2.4 in {{?I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}. An
> implementation MAY choose a different strategy of probe data prioritization 
> from prioritizing data deemed lost by loss detection algorithm in Section 6.1
> in {{?I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}.

Reviewer: how about turning the order around a bit?

```suggestion
{{?I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}, Section 6.2.4 also highlights consideration of 
application priorities when sending probe packets after PTO timer expiration.
An implementation using this prioritization scheme for new or 
retransmitted data, MAY choose a different strategy for prioritizing probe data.
```
